---
layout: post
title: "Software is for people, not 'users'"
description: "Users are people"
category: software
tags: [software, UX]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

### Only two industries refer to their customers as 'users', one of them is... illegal drugs.

Back in 2011, Marc Andreesen wrote his famous editorial entitled "[Software is eating the world](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111903480904576512250915629460)" where he echoed a prevailing sentiment that had been building up, that software is gaining a center foothold in the world. More and more products now contain computers and people become enmeshed into a virtual web of devices, often hidden. These are helping them or keeping watch, or managing critical processes in the background. Software "is eating the world" because it also fundamentally changes human interaction with the environment and more and more being an intermediary in that task. Software is a part of people's lives and it makes no sense now to distinguish between people "using software" and those not.

In a second sense, the word 'user' has particular connotations.  We must keep in mind that software is made for people and programs are used to help them people achieve their goals. Reducing someone to a 'user' is in that sense demeaning. Sometimes, of course, we must distinguish strictly between people that make use of certain programs, but I've found that there is usually no loss of precision by simply referring to 'users' as simply 'people' or 'customers'.

Let's take a page from Mozilla.org and see how that can work in practice: 

[Mozilla's Privacy Principles](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/privacy/principles/), a page dedicated to Mozilla's principles as it pertains to data privacy.

Right from the start, the page informs us it's about "how we [Mozilla] manage **user data** we collect". That could easily be changed to "how we manage **people's data** we collect". First of all, that data is not just "user data", it's "user**'s** data" because data fundamentally belongs to people, not those that collect it. Secondly, by emphasizing "people" instead of "users" we are putting a human face on top of things. The data belongs to actual people and the preservation of it should be as important as the protection of people.

"Use and share information in a way that is transparent and benefits **the user**." -- This one could be changed to "Use and share information in a way that is transparent and benefits **the people who use our software**." That emphasizes that it's people who use the software and not merely generic 'users'.

"Develop products and advocate for best practices that put **users** in control of their data and online experiences." -- This is is pretty straightforward and we can change 'users' to 'people' without fundamentally changing the meaning or precision needed.

In conclusion:

* We should emphasize that it's people who use software.

* Saying 'user' is adding an often unneeded specificity and creating an emphatic barrier between developers and people who use software.

* We can no longer divide the world between "users of software" and "nonusers". The vast majority of people interact with computing technology every day.

Jobava
